Initial text for rule of two modifications (#17)
git-bom/spec: SPEC.md

## Specifications
### Artifact ID

> A hash function over the []byte of an artifact satisfies the canonical, unique, immutable requirements for an artifact identifier.

Reviewer: Nitpick, but the `[]byte` Go-ism may be better replaced by "byte array" or some other similarly-generic term. The specific syntax is _pretty-intelligible_ as-is, but may still be a slight barrier to understanding depending on audience background.

Author: @alilleybrinker Suggestions on how to handle the use of []byte further up in artifact equivalency?

```
Two artifacts are equivalent if and only if `[]byte(artifact1) == []byte(artifact2)`
```

Reviewer: Hmm... I take it the point here is that two articles are equivalent only if their bit representation is equal, so perhaps say that directly?

> A hash function over the []byte of an artifact satisfies the canonical, unique, immutable requirements for an artifact identifier.

Reviewer 2: While I understand the go-ism as well, and it's been useful shorthand in slides, for the spec I am inclined to agree with Andrew's suggestion.

Perhaps this will suffice in the generic?

```suggestion
Because two artifacts are equivalent if and only if their binary representations are equal, a hash function may be applied to the binary representation of an artifact to yield an identifier which satisfies the canonical, unique, and immutable requirements of artifact identifiers.
```

Reviewer 2: Unfortunately, github doesn't let me open a comment or suggestion in an area of the document not being modified by this PR ...

So I'll write it here ...

> Two artifacts are equivalent if and only if their binary representations are equal. This can be expressed in pseudocode with the following function: `[]byte(artifact1) == []byte(artifact2)`

Author: @alilleybrinker Does the above work for you?

### Artifact Identifier Types

> The vast majority of source code artifacts are already indexed by their git object identifiers (gitoids) as git objects of type blob.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The majority of open source software source code today is already stored in git, and therefore is indexed by a git object identifier ("gitoid") of type "blob".
```

Author: I've incorporated the quoting of "gitoid" and "blob".  

Dropped 'vast'.  

Incorporated 'stored in git'

> For this reason GitBOM uses the gitoid for an artifact as its artifact ID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this reason, GitBOM has chosen to use the "gitoid" of an Artifact as its Artifact Identifier.
```

Reviewer 2: In my suggestion, I've capitalized Artifact and Artifact Identifier as these are proper nouns we are defining. I'm not beholden to this choice, though I think it is good form in a specification to delineate which terms are being defined as domain-specific.

Author: Suggestion adopted.

## Specifications
### Artifact ID

> A hash function over the []byte of an artifact satisfy the canonical, unique, immutable requirements for an artifact identifier.

Author: Excellent suggestion.  Adopted.

> A hash function over the []byte of an artifact satisfy the canonical, unique, immutable requirements for an artifact identifier.

Author: Fixed

> The vast majority of the source code artifacts are already indexed by git object id (gitoids) as git objects of type blob.

Author: Adopted.

> For this reason GitBOM uses the git object id (gitoid) (as a blob) for an artifact as its artifact ID.  

Author: Adopted.

> For this reason GitBOM uses the git object id (gitoid) (as a blob) for an artifact as its artifact ID.  

Reviewer 3: Thoughts?

> 

Reviewer 3: It probably makes sense to have this as it's own subsection rather than hanging off of the "Artifact ID" subsection.
```suggestion
### Gitoid Identifier Types
```suggestion

> Git currently supports two varieties of gitoids.  One is based on SHA1 and is in common use.  The other is based on SHA256 and has been very slow to garner adoption.  In order to distinguish between them we will use the gitoid uri prefixes of gitoid:blob:sha1 and gitoid:blob:sha256.

Reviewer 3: Consider adding a comment at the end of this paragraph about the flexibility this provides to implement other Gitoid Identifier Types supporting hashing algorithms beyond SHA1 and SHA256

> Git currently supports two varieties of gitoids.  One is based on SHA1 and is in common use.  The other is based on SHA256 and has been very slow to garner adoption.  In order to distinguish between them we will use the gitoid uri prefixes of gitoid:blob:sha1 and gitoid:blob:sha256.

Author: I've done a slightly different rewrite than your suggestion, and added a statement about forward evolution of Gitoid Identifier Types.  Interested to see your thoughts :)

> All subsequent references to mandatory all identifiier types in this document should be interpretted to mean the list:

Author: Suggestion accepted :)

> All subsequent references to mandatory all identifiier types in this document should be interpretted to mean the list:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All subsequent references to mandatory identifier types in this document should be interpreted to mean the list:
```

- gitoid:blob:sha1
- gitoid:blob:sha256

### GitBOM Document

> A GitBOM document describes the immediate children of an artifact in the Artifact Dependency Graph (ADG).

Reviewer 3: This is a term that is being defined and will be reused, it should likely be capitalized everywhere
```suggestion
A GitBOM Document describes the immediate children of an artifact in the Artifact Dependency Graph (ADG).
```

> A GitBOM document utilizes precisely one identifier type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A GitBOM Document utilizes precisely one Gitoid Identifier Type.
```

> ### GitBOM identifier

Reviewer 4: Nit: stylistically, `identifier` should be uppercase to maintain consistency with the rest of the text.

Author: Many thanks for the nit :)  I will fix :)

Author: Fixed

> ### GitBOM identifier

Reviewer 3: Adding "Document" may bring clarity to which identifier is being discussed
```suggestion
### GitBOM Document Identifier
```

> A GitBOM document is identified by computing its identifier as an artifact with the identifier type used for identifiers within the GitBOM document itself.

Reviewer 3: I believe this is the result of this week's discussion. I may have misinterpreted something while seeking to provide further clarity.
```suggestion
A GitBOM Document is an artifact which can be identified by it's gitoid. The GitBOM Document Identifier must be generated using the same Gitoid Identifier Type as used within the GitBOM document itself.
```

#### GitBOM Document Header

> In order to distinguish the type of identifier used in the GitBOM document, it begins with a single newline terminated header line:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to distinguish which Gitoid Identifier Type is used in a GitBOM Document, the document begins with a single newline-terminated header line:
```

```

> ${identifier type uri prefix}\n

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
${gitoid identifier type uri prefix}\n
```

```

For example:

```
gitoid:blob:sha1\n
```

or

```
gitoid:blob:sha256\n
```

All identifiers in a GitBOM document MUST be of the identifier type declared in the header.

#### GitBOM Document Child Records

The GitBOM document after the header consists of a list of newline delimited child records

A child artifact which is itself a leaf artifacts would be represented by

```
blob⎵${artifact id of child}\n
```

A child artifact which is itself a derived artifact would be represented by
```

> blob⎵${artifact id of child}⎵bom⎵${GitBOM identifier of child's GitBOM document}\n

Reviewer 3: Keeping in sync with the proposed changes above...
```suggestion
blob⎵${artifact id of child}⎵bom⎵${GitBOM Document Identifier of child's GitBOM document}\n
```

```

> The child artifact redords must be written to the GitBOM Document in lexical order.

Reviewer 4: Misspelling: `redords` should be `records`

Author: Fixed.  Many thanks for the suggestion :)

> The artifact id and GitBOM document id must both be of the identifier type declared in the GitBOM document header.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The artifact id and GitBOM Document Id must both be of the identifier type declared in the GitBOM document header.
```

### GitBOM Identifier Embedding

> Each build tool should embed into the output artifact a new line delimited, lexically ordered, list of GitBOM identifiers for each mandatory identifier type in a manner:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each build tool should embed into the output artifact a new line delimited, lexically ordered, list of GitBOM identifiers for each mandatory Gitoid Identifier Type in a manner:
```

Author: Fixed.

1. Appropriate to the type of artifact
2. Generally agreed upon for that artifact

### GitBOM Document Construction by a Build Tool

> A build tool creating an output artifact must compute a GitBOM document of each mandatory artifact id type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A build tool creating an output artifact must compute a GitBOM Document of each mandatory artifact id type.
```

Reviewer 3: Must or should?

Author: My instinct is MUST.  However, there is the corner case of 'is the build tool even doing GitBOM' to think about.

For each input artifact the build tool must:

1. Compute the git object id of the input - ${artifact identifier}

> 2. Examine the input for an embedded GitBOM identifier - ${gitbom idenfitier}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Examine the input for an embedded GitBOM Document Identifier - ${gitbom document identifier}
```

Author: Fixed

> The build tool must persist a GitBOM document using the ${artifact identifier} and ${gitbom identifier} for each input.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The build tool must persist a GitBOM Document using the ${artifact identifier} and ${gitbom document identifier} for each input.
```

Author: Fixed

### GitBOM Document persistence by a Build Tool

> Each build tool should persist all GitBOM documents it generates.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each build tool should persist all GitBOM Documents it generates.
```

Author: Fixed

Generically, GitBOM persistence can be thought of as having an abstract API:
```
WriteGitBOM(GitBOM id,GitBOM contents) returns error
ReadGitBOM(GitBOM id) returns GitBOM Contents
```

WriteGitBOM should check that GitBOM id matches GitBOM contents and return an error if it does not.

####  GitBOM Document persistence by a Build Tool to its local filesystem

> If a build tool persists GitBOM information to its local filesystem, the build tool should write out the GitBOM document to ```${GITBOM_DIR}/objects/${GitBOMID:0:2}/${GitBOMID:2:}``` where ```${artifact id}``` is the GitBOM id in lowercase hexidecimal.

Reviewer 5: Should it be ${GITBOM_DIR}/.gitbom/objects as the current prototypes have it ?

Author: @bharsesh I'm open to that discussion... but I'm curious why not just set ${GITBOM_DIR} to include the .gitbom/ portion if that is what the user desires?

Reviewer 5: If .gitbom is user specific, then its ok. It could well be .bom or .gitbom whatever the user desires. I pointed this out mainly for consistency as we switched between .bom and .gitbom in the tools.

#### GitBOM Document Header

In order to distinguish the type of identifier used in the GitBOM Document, it begins with a single newline terminated header line:

```
${Gitoid Identifier Type uri prefix}\n
```

For example:

```
gitoid:blob:sha1\n
```

or

```
gitoid:blob:sha256\n
```

All identifiers in a GitBOM Document MUST be of the Gitoid Identifier Type declared in the header.

#### GitBOM Document Child Records

The GitBOM Document after the header consists of a list of newline delimited child records

A child artifact which is itself a leaf artifacts would be represented by

```
blob⎵${artifact id of child}\n
```

A child artifact which is itself a derived artifact would be represented by
```
blob⎵${artifact id of child}⎵bom⎵${GitBOM identifier of child's GitBOM Document}\n
```

The child artifact records must be written to the GitBOM Document in lexical order.

The artifact id and GitBOM Document id must both be of the Gitoid Identifier Type declared in the GitBOM Document header.

### GitBOM Identifier Embedding

> Each build tool should embed into the output artifact a new line delimited, lexically ordered, list of GitBOM identifiers for each mandatory Gitoid Identifier Type in a manner:

Author: > Also I think its implied here that the file contents should be treated as binary - ie, the line endings are literal `\n` not whatever the host's line-ending convention is. Likewise all the text is pure ascii, so unicode or other encoding normalization does not come into play. Similarly, "lexically ordered" is over the symbols as bytes, not treating the bytes as text in under any particular locale's ordering.
> 
> I don't remember if the spec already has a section explicitly calling out how these hex strings are encoded (ie fixed length, leading zeros intact, lowercase). But it should have one, and every mention of hex strings should refer to that (rather than leaving it unspecified, or repeating the same text over and over).
> 
> "Delimited" implies the last record does not have a trailing `\n` - is that intended?

I think this has been addressed in #23 .  Let me know what you think.

> Each build tool should embed into the output artifact a new line delimited, lexically ordered, list of GitBOM identifiers for each mandatory Gitoid Identifier Type in a manner:

Author: Also I believe I previously shifted from delimited to terminated :)

1. Appropriate to the type of artifact

> 2. Generally agreed upon for that artifact

Author: Agreed on related specs.  For many file formats the build tool author is canonical though (example, CPython for .pyc).

### GitBOM Document Construction by a Build Tool

A build tool creating an output artifact must compute a GitBOM Document of each mandatory artifact id type.

For each input artifact the build tool must:

1. Compute the git object id of the input - ${artifact identifier}
2. Examine the input for an embedded GitBOM Document Identifier - ${gitbom document identifier}

The build tool must persist a GitBOM Document using the ${artifact identifier} and ${gitbom document identifier} for each input.

### GitBOM Document persistence by a Build Tool

Each build tool should persist all GitBOM Documents it generates.

Generically, GitBOM persistence can be thought of as having an abstract API:
```

> WriteGitBOM(GitBOM id,GitBOM contents) returns error

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
WriteGitBOM(GitBOM id,GitBOM contents) 
```

ReadGitBOM(GitBOM id) returns GitBOM Contents
```

> WriteGitBOM should check that GitBOM id matches GitBOM contents and return an error if it does not.

Author: I've added a section about WriteGitBOM containing validation checking for id matching contents and for malformed GitBOM documents.  I have not yet written anything about referential integrity.

> WriteGitBOM should check that GitBOM id matches GitBOM contents and return an error if it does not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
I suggest removing mention of error checking within the function, as that is ancillary to the format being specified here.

Author: I've removed the 'return error' but added some commentary below about validations per some of @jsgf 's comments.

> ####  GitBOM Document persistence by a Build Tool to its local filesystem

Author: Fair, but we do have implementors *now* who need that info on filesystems (and elf files).  So where ever we put it, we need to work it out soon :)

> If a build tool persists GitBOM information to its local filesystem, the build tool should write out the GitBOM Document to ```${GITBOM_DIR}/objects/${GitBOMID:0:2}/${GitBOMID:2:}``` where ```${artifact id}``` is the GitBOM id in lowercase hexidecimal.

Reviewer 6: > `${GITBOM_DIR}/objects/${GitBOMID:0:2}/${GitBOMID:2:}`

This doesn't include the hash type, so it effectively ends up distinguishing hash functions by length.

>  GitBOM id in lowercase hexidecimal

Implied - fixed width (ie, leading zeros are not suppressed).

> If a build tool persists GitBOM information to its local filesystem, the build tool should write out the GitBOM Document to ```${GITBOM_DIR}/objects/${GitBOMID:0:2}/${GitBOMID:2:}``` where ```${artifact id}``` is the GitBOM id in lowercase hexidecimal.

Author: @jsgf Per the last spec meeting, I've pulled out the FS stuff from this PR so we can handle it in a separate PR.

> If a build tool persists GitBOM information to its local filesystem, the build tool should write out the GitBOM Document to ```${GITBOM_DIR}/objects/${GitBOMID:0:2}/${GitBOMID:2:}``` where ```${artifact id}``` is the GitBOM id in lowercase hexidecimal.

Author: See #20

### Build tool persistence of related metadata

If the build tool has additional metadata to persist that makes referece to the Artifact Dependency Graph (ADG),

> it should persist that metadata to a subdirectory of the directory to which the output artifact is being written of the form: ```${GITBOM_DIR}/metadata/${tool}/```.  Filenaming and subdirectory structure below that point is at the discretion of the build tool.

Author: > Is this metadata relevant to the rest of the spec? How does it fit with the rest of the data model? Are we defining a specific format / schema / data model for this metadata? Or is the only relevance that it might reference GitOIDs?

Its relevant as a 'release valve'.  So far pretty much all tool implementors have felt the need for metadata.  Having a common place to put them that is properly partitioned avoids... unfortunate choices.

> 
> How is this different from object files or any other intermediate build artifact? After all, they also contain GitOID references.

Interesting point.  I would argue that the intermediate build artifacts are 'primary data' not 'metadata'.

### Build tool selection of GITBOM_DIR

> GITBOM_DIR document should be set in order of precedence by:

Reviewer 2: I think this is an appropriate order of precedence, and point out the need to not be overly prescriptive, and to consider ramifications of default values.

To summarize our meeting conversation... do you think we should add any of the following clarifications?

```
  - The lack of a GITBOM_DIR env var should not be taken as a signal to _not_ generate a gitbom.
  - The presence of an empty GITBOM_DIR env var should be taken as a signal to skip gitbom generation
```

Author: Incorporated
